Hello and welcome back to the course on deep learning today we've got a very exciting tutorial ahead.
We're talking about a long a short term memory or elist Yemens for short.
So let's get started.
It's actually going to be quite a saturated trial so we go to our own little plan of attack for today.
Today we're going to first of all look at a bit of history.
So word came from what was the main idea behind it white people invented it and then we're going to
be talking about Ellis the stem architecture.
There's going to be the bulk of our tutorial today so be prepared for that.
And then we're going to have an example walk through.
Hopefully we'll have enough time for that as well.
All right.
So let's get started here.
We've got a problem which we identified in the previous tutorials we talked about the vanishing gradient
problem.
So in short what happens is as we propagate the error through the network it has to go through the unravelled
temporal loop and as it does that it goes through these layers of neurons which are connected to themselves.
These hidden layers which are connected to themselves and they're connected by the means of a always
called the w w w recurrent weight and because the weight is applied many many times on top of itself
that causes the gradient to decline rapidly meaning that the weight of the layers on the very far left
are updated much slower than the waist on the other layers on the far right and this creates a domino
effect because the weights of the far left legs are very important because they dictate the outputs
of those layers which are the inputs to the far right layers and therefore the whole training of the
network suffers.
And that is called The problem of the vanishing gradient.
And as a rule of thumb we could see here that if X is small then we have vanishing greatly and if x
is large then we have exploding gradient.
So now how do you solve this problem we've talked about we talked about a couple of possible solutions
we talked about clipping the gradient or penalize the gradient for exploding gradients.
We talked about smartly selecting the weights or the ex-state networks which we didn't go into detail
on for the vanishing gradient.
And also we talked about the LSD for the vanishing brain just if you separate yourself from all this
information on all this theory and knowledge.
How would you solve a problem like this.
What's the easiest and Fossa solution to it.
So if we have w Reyk is in simple terms less than one then we have vanishment gradient if we have W.
wreck greater than one we've got exploding green What's the first thing that comes to mind to solve
this problem.
Well the first thing comes to mind is to make W Raechel one.
And that's exactly what was done in the Ellis DMAs.
This is a very simplified explanation and there's definitely more to it than just w technicals one.
But in general that's the idea and that's all it took.
And when I saw this for the first time I was so excited that you know the solution is so simple it's
really a genius solution that completely gets rid of the vanishing gradient problem.
And so who are the people behind this.
Here are two gentlemen we've talked about Seppala writer and the second person is Jurgen Schmid Hober
who is who was his supervisor during SEPs research or Ph.D..
And so basically they wrote a paper on it in 1987 about Elliston's and that's when LACMA were introduced
to the world for the first time.
Very exciting topic.
So let's have a look at what they actually are.
So we've got a recurrent neural network right here on raveled temporal loop.
This is what it looks like.
If you dig in inside the recurrent role or network and right here I wanted to do a quick shout out to
Crista for all law.
So here is his blog right here.
A very well-written blog.
Amazing images as you can see.
And we're going to be using images from this blog in our explanation here so thank you very much to
Christopher for making this publicly available and allowing the use of his images in other works.
So we'll definitely reference this at the end of today's tutorial.
And going back to our presentation.
So here we've got the recurrent neural network and this is what it looks like inside.
And this is where the problem lies.
So this operation that happens here is actually a neural network or operation as will see further down
but simply put as you have outputs coming into your module into this module this operation is applied
and then goes into the next module oppression is applied and so on.
So as you apply this approach and when you back propagate it goes through all of this and that's where
the weights are applied that's where the wreck is sitting.
As that weight is applied as it's applied is applied the gradient vanishes vanishes and vanishes and
that means that the weights cannot be updated properly or fast enough to train the network properly
and so the further away you try to look the more problems you have in the more of the bashin gradient
you have.
This is the standard Arnon and this is what the Ellis T.M. version looks like and I know you might be
thinking that well this is super complex.
This There's so much going on here.
And indeed it is a bit more complex than the standard Arnon But check this out.
This is how elist teams are normally displayed in literature and in papers and so on.
So definitely this is the same thing as you saw before previous before but is just a much more convoluted
explanation or representation.
So definitely this option is better and we're going to stick with this one and more so the it looks
it looks difficult now but the goal is that by the end of this tutorial you are completely comfortable
what's going on here and I think that's pretty exciting.
And this even though it may seem a bit complex now.
Towards the end of the trial hopefully you'll be able to navigate LACMA quite well.
And so before we go deep into what is going on here I wanted to highlight the main point so remember
we said Jurek equals 1.
Well that's this line over here that pipeline at the top as you can see there's nothing much not much
going on here.
There's only like two point pointwise operations as well understand for the down and there's no complex
neural network led operations are all brought out to this part and that's this is the essence if you're
going to take away one thing from today's tutorial then this is that you have a memory cell which is
called the memory cell.
I call the memory pipelined Which just goes through time.
And this is as going through time and it can vary freely of flow through time sometimes it might be
removed and erased sometimes things might be added into it.
But that's pretty much it.
Otherwise it flows through times freely and therefore when you back propagate through these Alice jams
you don't have that problem of your vanishing gradient.
That's that's the essence of LSD.
All right so now let's dig in in a bit more detail so we're going to replace these modules on the left
on the right.
We have something more simple is going to replace them with our representation.
So C stands for memory.
Memory.
Yes.
Is your output so you can see your output going out into the world.
And here you got your output going into the next module into the next block.
And then here you've got your input XTi.
So basically this is the output from the previous module which also went into the world but also is
coming here.
So there we go.
So an Ellis T.M. module takes in three inputs and has two outputs.
So City NHT because these are the same.
And the important thing to understand and remember is that everything here is a vector.
So all of these are this is not just one neuron not just one value.
There are lots and lots and lots of values here behind hiding behind this war.
This letter XTi and here as well and here as well and everywhere these are all
layers.
So just remember that and we're going to reference them as vectors because that's pretty much the same
thing.
Just lots of different values in one vector.
Remove that and that will make it will allow you not to go down the wrong path in the intuitive understanding
of this.
Just remember that these are all vectors.
And let's go through the legend.
So we've got vector transfers so any line here is a vector being transferred or kind of moving around
in this in this net.
In this architecture and yes there's just going to reiterate that it is a vector.
Then we got a concatenation here.
So here you can see that there's two lines combining into one.
And important to understand that this is done here just to save space and make it less convoluted than
it possibly could be.
But the way the best way to imagine it is you that these two lines are running in parallel legend not
actually combining concatenation means that you combine these two actions on top of each other but I
think it's even easier to understand if you just think of it as in these there are two pipes running
here but they're running parallel to each other.
You've got one pipe and then it goes here and the second pipe goes here.
Then these same pipes go here and there they touch that.
So basically you have two pipes running in parallel feeding into these neural network layer layer operations.
Then you've got copy.
So where do we have copy you have copy here the memories copies go ahead and just copy it here then
this output is copied over here.
Then you've got pointwise operations.
Now we get to the interesting stuff.
So you've got a couple of pointwise operations here.
That's five of them and the first thing we're going to talk about these ones the x's the Xs are valves
and they all the names this is the forget valve the memory valve and the output vault.
And in literature you will see like letters f v and O.
In actual formulas representing these valves and so a valve looks like this in plumbing and valve looks
like this and we're going to kind of think of it that way as well.
So you've got water or basically something flowing through and then you can either close it or you can
open it or you can close it to some extent.
Same thing here.
So you've got the forget valve is basically controlled by this layer operation and we'll talk about
that in a second.
And based on the output of that based on the decision made here this valve was either closed or open
so if it's open memory flows through freely if it's closed then memory is cut off and therefore it's
not.
Doesn't this notion sort of further and then new memory just is will be added here probably based on
the results here then you've got the memory valve which again is controlled by a Sigma C must and for
the sigmoid activation function that means that that's the activation function used in these léa operations.
And as the decision is made here this value which is another layer operation which we'll get to in a
second is either added to the memory or is somewhat added to the memory or is not added to the memory
depending on the value that is decided in this valve.
And then again another valve controlled by sigmoid is remember sigmoid.
Why are we using was because they're from 0 to 1 and therefore zero sense for no memory no.
Nothing goes through one stands for something goes through.
And then here you've got them valve which is the forget valve since they are not forgetful this is the
output valve and we'll get to that in a second.
We're pretty much are you going through the whole network already.
So and then we've got the T-shaped kind of like pipe or T-shaped joint.
Well I'll show you where that is.
That is over here.
So where you have memory going through and then you can add additional memories if you would go back
you've got memory flowing through the joint and maybe some additional memory will be added into it maybe
not depending on the ball.
And then you've got the engine operation here that's kind of like mathematical behind it why you want
to be in between minus 1 and 1.
We won't get into details on that but that's another pointwise operation here.
And you have and you've got the neural network layer operations over here.
That's that's their representation.
So basically just think of them as you've got and you've got instead of pointwise points like element
by element of a vector.
You know if you want to multiply a vector by 0 you multiply every element by 0 or by one or by a certain
amount.
Kind of think of a way that's a very simplistic way to think about these pointless operations whereas
these ones are a bit more complex you've got layer coming in.
And then you go on Alair coming out or like a lot because again everything here is a vector so you've
got a lair of the sigmoid coming out controlling the valve for each one of these elements in the vector
of memory.
So there's not just one scene where there's many different and that's why you've got a whole layer coming
in.
And then you've got a lair coming on.
These are layer operations.
So just remember that.
And so we're ready to look into this in in step by step and we're going to very simple because we've
discussed everything already in terms of hard work so we've got a new value coming in.
You've got memory you've got non-memory you've got value coming from previous node and whoops.
And together they are combined to try to decide whether this valve should go ahead or should be closed
or should be open though it was somewhat closed or open.
Then you've got these two again combined together on a combined like they again flow in parallel and
then they're combined in in here or in this operation.
And basically it's just them combined it's like there's lots of layers here lots of layers here one
like lots of neurons here not some neurons here and then all of that is basically in one layer operation
is used to decide what value we're going to pass through.
And then also if that value is going to pass or not and to what extent then here we've got the memory
flowing through.
We've got the forget valve if it's closed or open.
We've got memory valves close door open and we're adding in some memory possibly if we want to update.
So basically we can let this whole memory flow through then keep this from closed keep this and open
the memory and change keep this one or we can keep this one close and keep this one open then we can
update the memory completely.
And here finally we've got these two values combined to decide what part of the memory memory pipeline
is going to be output you become output of this module is it going to go as fully as the output or to
some extent and so on.
So again these decide that.
So that's how it all works.
Pretty straightforward architecture.
Let's have a look at a specific example to understand this a bit better.
So the example we talked about I'm a boy who likes to learn is that it you cheat in translation to check
if this were girl then here would is Sam Holker.
Tara Rodda OK it meaning that these two words not just this word would change but also it would affect
these two words so different to in check rather than in English.
So these words are affected by the gender of the subject and therefore in our list and we might want
to store the subject boy in this case in the memory.
So for instance let's say boys start here and then it's just flowing through freely and nothing is changing.
Like if we get.
If our new information doesn't tell us that there's a new subject.
We just have boy flying through freely and keeps flowing again.
If for instance we have a new subject we have girl or we have we have a name like Amanda or something
else and we understand that we've got a new subject then rules or we'll let this valve will close this
Whalsay you know destroy the memory that we had then open this wall put a new memory and then put the
name here put the subject on just put in the gender one just put in like female.
Well I should put the whole as much information as we can.
For instance this could be the Archita it doesn't have to be like this but as an example we could put
in for instance girl now into this into this pipeline.
And why would we do that.
Well because then from that we can extract different elements of information we can extract that it's
female we can extract that singular right.
So not just that it's there there's additional information the word girl that is singular we can extract
more information we can extract that.
The word girl for instance has four letters were that it was capitalized or wasn't capitalized just
as these are all very very intuitive examples doesn't have to work this way but this is how it could
work.
And so then we have the word girl in here.
And so that's how this world works and this world works.
And so what this evolved does is it extracts certain information from what you have in the memory.
So for instance if we have no girl in here and for the purposes of the current of the next word or next
sentence that's coming up you might need to know like we saw you need to know the gender.
So then this valve will facilitate the extraction of the gender and that will go as an input into your
next module and it'll help the next module like it will be here.
Decide and decide how to deal with the information that's coming its way how to put it into the correct
form for the female gender for example.
And so that's how the output valve works and what it does.
So there we go that's how the long short term memory works.
And I hope this was a quite an intuitive explanation and now you have a bit of a better understanding
what it what elist hams are like and those of additional reading you can definitely reference the original
paper by our two offers who created elist yams.
Alternatively if you don't want to get that deep into mathematics and into the technical stuff there
is a great great blog by Christopher Ola which we've already mentioned.
Great explanation of LSD DMD's I highly recommend to check it out.
There's a bit of mathematics not too heavy.
And there's another blog by.
She yawned and asked him SDM and it's diagrams diagrams are a bit more in-depth.
So they're a bit more.
There's a bit more less space saving but dagger's have been more deft might be easier to understand
in some cases no mathematics whatsoever just plain intuition.
So I also highly recommend this blog to check it out.
If you would like to get additional information on elist hymns and on that note I hope you enjoy this
Statoil and I look forward to your next hour.
Until then enjoy deep learning.